---
layout: post
date: 2024-06-08
title: "CPTS: Frequently Asked Questions"
categories: [hackthebox]
tags: [hackthebox, CPTS]
---

# About
There are many review blogs that go over the experience that people have had with the CPTS exam, and while they do cover a lot of what someone might need to know about starting their journey, I still find that I'm having to re-answer a lot of the same questions. This blog post is meant to fully answer the most common questions that might not really fit in other 'review' style blog posts about CPTS. I am not an employee of HackTheBox, but I do spend a lot of time helping on the [Hack The Box community discord](https://discord.gg/hackthebox), in the #CPTS channel. Depending on when you are reading this, and how often I update it, some information may be out of date.

Additional thanks to placeholder/placeholder/placeholder for helping make this FAQ.

# Questions:

## How much does the exam cost?

One voucher currently costs $210 USD and included 2 attempts.


## How long is the exam, and do I have to schedule it?

You may start the exam at any time, and you have 10 full days to complete the content and submit your report from the moment you enter the exam.


## What do I need to do, in order to take the exam?

In order to be eligible to take the exam, you must first complete the entire [Penetration Tester](https://academy.hackthebox.com/paths/jobrole) job role path. There is currently no way to bypass this.


## If I finished the Penetration Tester job role path, and new content is added to modules in the path, do I have to complete them before I can take the exam?

No - at this time, as long as you have reached completion of the path at any point, you do not need to complete any updated content.


## There are many options/plans for purchasing/accessing modules - which one should I use?

If your intention is to only do the CPTS certification, the most efficient way to do this is to purchase 1 month of the 'Platinum' plan ($68 for 1000 cubes), and then 1 month of the 'Gold' plan ($38 for 500 cubes). This will be enough for 1500 cubes, and while the Penetration Tester path is 2000 cubes total, each module completed in the HackTheBox Academy will refund a percentage of the cubes. The two months of subscription should be enough for you to go through the whole path.

If your plan is to also do additional modules in the CBBH/CDSA certification paths, the 'Silver Annual' ($490) plan might be a better idea, as rather than giving you cubes to use, this plan simply unlocks access to all modules up to Tier 2 for the duration of the plan. Any modules you complete during this plan will be yours to keep. The cost of this plan also includes 1 exam voucher ($210 value) of your choice between CPTS/CBBH/CDSA, so you should factor that into the cost of the subscription.


## If I get cubes with a monthly plan, do I lose them after the month?

No, any cubes you get in a subscription are yours to keep. The monthly subscriptions are a little confusing, but you can think of it more like a time gate. While you do get to keep the cubes, you are limited by a maximum of 1000/mo on the Platinum plan. With how few cubes most modules will cost you in the Penetration Tester path, and how long it will likely take you to go through those modules, it would be unlikely for you to finish modules faster than the cubes from a subscription will provide.


## What tool restrictions are there on the exam?

None! Just be aware that you're going to have to write a report for the exam, and if it would be difficult to walk through the steps of using a tool, it could make the report more difficult.


## Is it okay to do modules in the course out of order?

Unless you already have significant experience with the course material, it's highly recommended that you complete the modules in the order that they are displayed on the 'job role paths' page. Many modules will make the assumption that you already have skills from previous modules in the order of the path, and if you are not familiar with the concepts, you might not be equipped to properly handle the content.


## What is 'AEN' that people in the community refer to?

AEN stands for 'Attacking Enterprise Networks', which is the final module of the 'Penetration Tester' path. This module is a mini penetration test, complete with a FULL walkthrough of all steps.


## What does it mean to do AEN 'blind'?

Many of us in the community often recommend doing the 'Attacking Enterprise Networks' module blind, to use it as a kind of practice test. When we say to do it 'blind', what we mean is to scroll to the bottom of the module, start the lab, and work through the lab as if you were going into the exam itself. Even reading the questions for the module might spoil some of the content, and so you should avoid coming back to the module page until after you have successfully compromised any/all domains. This should give you a general idea of what the real exam will feel like, and let you know where you might have some gaps in the skills you've learned from the course.


## How hard is the exam compared to HTB boxes?

The academy uses a system for difficulty that is much the same as you'd expect from the main platform. In this way, the modules in the Penetration Tester path include 2 'Fundamental' modules, 11 'Easy' modules, and 15 'Medium' modules. The exam will reflect this difficulty just the same, and nothing on the exam would be out of place in an Easy/Medium machine on the main platform.


## If something goes wrong during the exam, what should I do?

There is no official support though the HTB Discord, so the only place to get support is through the [official site](https://help.hackthebox.com/en/articles/5986762-contacting-htb-support). Support outside of EU timezones is sparse, so if you find that it is taking them a long time to respond, you should not worry - as long as the problem you are experiencing is on the HTB side (and not a skill issue), they are usually pretty good about refunding the time you lost.


## I submitted my report - when can I expect to get the results?

Pass or fail, it can take up to 20 business days to get your result.


## If I fail, can I start my second attempt immediately?

No, on a failing attempt, you must wait for your report to get graded before you can start your next attempt. You have 14 days from the day you receive your review to start your second attempt, otherwise you forfeit the voucher. This timer starts from the day your review is provided, and not from the day you submit the report.


## How are the flags set up in the exam?

Any and all questions you have about flags will be answered immediately once you start the exam. I would say not to focus too much on the flags before you begin, since it doesn't work the way you might expect in other certifications (such as OSCP), where you're chasing down optional objectives to reach a certain threshold - think of them more like 'checkpoints' in CPTS.


## What outside material should I use to help practice for the exam?

Some people in the community have differing opinions on this, but I would say not to compare this to other certifications that cause people to feel the need to look to outside practice. Unlike other courses/certifications, the CPTS course does an excellent job at preparing you for the exam content itself, and you will not find the exam straying from the course material. For my personal opinion, I would say that all you need is the course.

Most of the community generally agrees that doing individual boxes isn't a great way to practice, because the exam was built as a full network, rather than just a collection of random boxes. That being said, ippsec did recently release a [youtube playlist](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLidcsTyj9JXItWpbRtTg6aDEj10_F17x5) of machines he believes will help practice for the exam. At the time of writing this, it just came out, so we don't really have any community feedback from anyone who has done it, and taken the exam.

Other opinons for outside practice include the main platform [Pro Labs](https://app.hackthebox.com/prolabs) (specifically Dante). While the pro labs will stray from the Penetration Tester course content, they are built in the same networked style as the CPTS exam, and will at least give you some experience working in a real network.

Whatever you choose, you should not consider any outside study as 'necessary'.


## It's taking me a long time to go through the modules - how long should it take?

It may be tempting to rush through the content to see your completion numbers going up, but I would not concern yourself with speed, or compare yourself to the pace of others. The most important thing is that you understand everything you did in a module, and as long as you're doing that, you'll be setting yourself up for success.


## If I get enough flags to pass, can I still fail due to the report?

Yes. To quote the exam information page of the CPTS, you are required to provide 'a commercial-grade report'. The 'Documentation & Reporting' module gives you a sample report, so that it can set the expectation of the professionalism/quality required in the report.


## Should I practice writing a report?

When you first go through the 'Documentation & Reporting' module as part of the path, you might think that you get the gist of the concepts, and that you can wing it during the exam, but this is a dangerous way to approach it. The community recommends that you try to write a mock report, prior to the exam, so that you can get a better feel for just how much work it will be. The 'Attacking Enterprise Networks' module is a great place to do this mock report, as it has significant amount of content, and quite a few findings to practice on. Some members of the discord community (myself included) also offer to review mock reports, to help give you tips on what you might be doing right/wrong. If you have a completed mock report, ask in #CPTS if anyone will review it for you.


## Can I use the pwnbox in the exam?

You can, and it will have a much longer lifetime than it does in the normal academy. However, it is highly recommended that you use your own machine for the exam, unless you simply have no other option. If you do decide to use the pwnbox, it's recommended that you keep any notes/information that are critical to the exam outside of the pwnbox, just in case the pwnbox is lost for any reason.


## Should I use Kali or Parrot?

Personal preference.


## Can I go back through the course content, during the exam?

Absolutely, but it's worth noting that if you spin up a machine, it will despawn your exam labs. The exam VPN and academy VPN are also different, so you will need to switch between them, if you are accessing academy labs.


## To be completed
